When I was young, my father wrote to me the Bible verse,
your word is a lamp to my foot and a light for my path.
And he said, keep that always in mind.
Remember God's word and live by it.
I was born in 1929 in the city of Furu, Estonia.
My family was religious and my God-fearing parents
lovingly cared for me and provided everything
that a child would need.
When my father learned the truth, he gave each of us a Bible
and we began to study it together.
My father was arrested in the summer of 1948.
Estonia was now under the Soviet regime,
but he was still working as a schoolteacher.
The local Department of Education asked him to come by.
He went dressed in summer clothes and wearing sandals
and he never came back.
At midnight, we heard someone banging at the door.
We opened it and soldiers came in and demanded our passports.
We put the passports on the table and they just said,
you are under arrest.
Pugged a prison in Tallinn was a place everyone was afraid of.
And I was afraid too.
I remember that I was taken down the steps to the basement
to a long corridor.
There was nothing in the cell besides a bench.
They slammed the door shut and that is when I became a little scared.
But then I prayed to Jehovah to help me
and a sense of peace came over me.
I lay down on the bench and fell asleep.
I was given a ten-year prison sentence
as an enemy of the state.
A year later, we were transferred to Russian prison camps.
Spiritual food was hard to get.
It couldn't be sent by mail.
But the angel somehow still provided for us
and we always had something.
Even a single verse or a good thought can help in prison.
In any case, God's word should be in our heart.
We should never forget it, even if we can only remember one verse.
At one point during my sentence,
I was allowed to live outside the prison camp.
One witness family took me and two other sisters into their home.
Living outside meant that the guard was not watching us all the time.
We were able to spend time together
and we could preach a little.
We even went from house to house.
Eventually, I moved to a dormitory
because there was not enough space.
And it also meant that the literature could be stored at my place.
Because if they arrested me, it wouldn't be a big deal.
But if the brother was arrested, it would be much worse.
They raided my place one night.
They put all the literature on the table and asked me where I got it.
I said,
the angels are bringing it to us and feeding us all the time.
So I was sentenced to another two years for possessing literature.
Then for the first time,
I heard that Jehovah's Witnesses were officially banned.
What a good feeling it was to be recognized as one of Jehovah's Witnesses.
That really gave me joy.
I saw Jehovah's help and that things were never too hard for me to bear.
If things were getting too difficult,
something would always change so that I could cope.
There was always that feeling that someone was looking after me.
I never felt alone or abandoned.
If only we could be faithful all the time,
then we would also be happy.
But sometimes we fail and so we lose joy.
Faithfulness gives joy.
In prison, you can stay faithful if you don't leave Jehovah
and if you don't forget to pray
and if you always remember why you are there.
You are there because you are on Jehovah's side.
I was not a thief.
I was not a killer.
But I was one of Jehovah's Witnesses
and that is worth being in prison for.